=head1 Getting Help and Further Learning

=head1 READ ME FIRST

If, after reading this guide and the other documents listed in this
section, you still don't have the answers/information needed, please
ask for help on the Apache/mod_perl mailing list.  But please, first 
try to browse the mailing list archive.  Most of the time you will 
find the answer to your questions by searching the archive, since it is 
very likely that someone else has already encountered the same problem
and found a solution for it.  If you ignore this advice, you should not
be surprised if your question is left unanswered - it bores people to
answer the same question more than once.  This does not mean that you
should avoid asking questions, but you should not abuse the available
help and you should I<RTFM> before you call for I<HELP>.  (Remember the
fable of the shepherd boy and the wolves).

For more information See L<Get helped with mod_perl|help/Get_help_with_mod_perl>.






=head1 Contacting me

Hi, I wrote this document to help people with mod_perl.  It does not
mean that if you have any question regarding mod_perl, perl or
whatever you think I might know, you should send it directly to me.
Please see the L<Get help with mod_perl|help/Get_help_with_mod_perl>
section and follow the guidelines described there.

However, you are welcome to submit corrections and suggestions
directly to me at
stas@stason.org?subject=mod_perl%20guide%20corrections.  If you are
going to submit heavy corrections of the text (I love those!), please
help me by downloading the source pages in POD from
http://www.stason.org/guide-snapshots/, directly editing them and
sending them to me.  I will use Emacs Ediff to perform an easy merge
of such changes.  Thank you!

I<PLEASE DO NOT SEND QUESTIONS DIRECTLY TO ME, I didn't invite those
by writing the guide.  They will all be immediately deleted.  Please
ask questions on the mod_perl list and if we can answer your question,
one (or more) of us will answer it on the list.  Thank you!>







=head1 Get help with mod_perl

=over

=item * mod_perl home

http://perl.apache.org

=item * mod_perl Source Garden project

http://modperl.sourcegarden.org




=item * mod_perl Books

=over

=item * 'Apache Modules' Book

http://www.modperl.com is the home site of The Apache Modules Book, a book
about creating Web server modules using the Apache API, written by
Lincoln Stein and Doug MacEachern.

The book should be available from your local bookstore or from your
favourite on-line bookseller.  O'Reilly lists this book as:

  Writing Apache Modules with Perl and C
  By Lincoln Stein & Doug MacEachern
  1st Edition March 1999
  2nd Edition Feb 2000
  1-56592-567-X, Order Number: 567X
  746 pages, $34.95

=item * 'Enabling web services with mod_perl' Book

http://www.modperlbook.com is the home site of the new mod_perl book,
that Eric Cholet and Stas Bekman are co-authoring.  We expect
the book to be published in fall 2000.

Ideas, suggestions and comments are welcome. Please send them to
info@modperlbook.com .

=back

=item * mod_perl Guide

by Stas Bekman at http://perl.apache.org/guide

=item * mod_perl FAQ

by Frank Cringle at http://perl.apache.org/faq/ .

=item * mod_perl performance tuning guide 

by Vivek Khera at http://perl.apache.org/tuning/ .

=item * mod_perl plugin reference guide 

by Doug MacEachern at http://perl.apache.org/src/mod_perl.html .

=item * Quick guide for moving from CGI to mod_perl

at http://perl.apache.org/dist/cgi_to_mod_perl.html .

=item * mod_perl_traps, common traps and solutions for mod_perl users

at http://perl.apache.org/dist/mod_perl_traps.html .

=item * mod_perl Quick Reference Card

http://www.refcards.com (Reference cards for Apache and other 
programs are available from this link)


=item * Articles

=over

=item * PerlMonth

http://perlmonth.com

=item *  Basic knowledge about Apache stages and
mod_perl handlers article in German 

http://www.heise.de/ix/artikel/2000/01/156/

=back


=item * mod_perl mailing lists

=over

=item * The mod_perl mailing list

The Apache/Perl mailing list I<is available for mod_perl users and
developers to share ideas, solve problems and discuss things related
to mod_perl and the Apache::* modules.>  To subscribe to this list,
send email to modperl-subscribe@apache.org .  To unsubscribe send
email to modperl-unsubscribe@apache.org .  Send email to 
modperl@apache.org to post to the list.

To subscribe to the digest list send email to
modperl-digest-subscribe@apache.org .

A I<searchable> mod_perl mailing list archive is available at
http://forum.swarthmore.edu/epigone/modperl . Thanks to Ken
Williams for this.

More archives available:

=over

=item *

http://www.geocrawler.com/lists/3/web/182/0/

=item *

http://www.mail-archive.com/modperl%40apache.org/

=item *

http://www.davin.ottawa.on.ca/archive/modperl/

=item *

http://marc.theaimsgroup.com/?l=apache-modperl

=item *

http://www.egroups.com/group/modperl/

=back



=item * The advocacy mailing list

The list for mod_perl advocacy issues, discussions about
sites, etc.

Subscribe by sending a mail to advocacy-subscribe@perl.apache.org.
Unsubscribe by sending a mail to advocacy-unsubscribe@perl.apache.org.
Use advocacy@perl.apache.org to post to the list.

The archive: http://www.mail-archive.com/advocacy@perl.apache.org/.


=item * The modperl-cvs mailing list

The modperl developers list is the list where you can watch mod_perl
getting patched.  No real discussions happen on this list, but if you
want to know about the latest changes in the mod_perl core before
everyone else, this is a list to be on.

To subscribe to this list, send email to
modperl-cvs-subscribe@apache.org .  To unsubscribe send email to
modperl-cvs-unsubscribe@apache.org .  Send email to
modperl-cvs@apache.org to post to the list.

No archives available.



=back


=back











=head1 Get help with Perl

=over

=item * The Perl FAQ

http://www.perl.com/CPAN/doc/FAQs/FAQ/PerlFAQ.html

=item * The Perl Home Page

http://www.perl.com/

=item * The Perl Journal

http://www.tpj.com/

=item * Perl Module Mechanics

http://world.std.com/~swmcd/steven/perl/module_mechanics.html - This
page describes the mechanics of creating, compiling, releasing and
maintaining Perl modules.

=item * perl5-porters mailing list

Send an email:

=over

=item * 

to perl5-porters-subscribe@perl.org to subscribe to this list.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-unsubscribe@perl.org to unsubscribe to this list.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-digest-subscribe@perl.org if you prefer a digest
version.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-digest-unsubscribe@perl.org to unsubscribe from the
digest.

=item * 

to perl5-porters-help@perl.org for more information about the
subscription options.

=back

See also http://tile.net/listserv/perl5portersdigest.html and
http://tile.net/lists/perl5porters.html .

List's archive is available at
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/.


=back












=head1 Get help with Perl/CGI

=over

=item * Perl/CGI FAQ

at http://www.perl.com/CPAN/doc/FAQs/cgi/perl-cgi-faq.html

=item * Answers to some troublesome Perl and Perl/CGI questions

http://stason.org/TULARC/webmaster/myfaq.html

=item * Idiot's Guide to CGI programming

http://www.perl.com/CPAN/doc/FAQs/cgi/idiots-guide.html

=item * WWW Security FAQ

http://www.w3.org/Security/Faq/www-security-faq.html

=item * CGI/Perl Taint Mode FAQ

http://www.gunther.web66.com/FAQS/taintmode.html (by Gunther
Birznieks)

=item * cgi-list mailing list

Send email to majordomo@jann.com with body:

  subscribe cgi-list


=back









=head1 Get help with Apache 

=over

=item * Apache Project's Home

http://www.apache.org

=item * Apache Quick Reference Card

http://www.refcards.com (other reference cards are also available 
from this link)

=item * The Apache FAQ

http://www.apache.org/docs/misc/FAQ.html

=item * Apache Server Documentation

http://www.apache.org/docs/

=item * Apache Handlers

http://www.apache.org/docs/handler.html

=item * mod_rewrite Guide

http://www.engelschall.com/pw/apache/rewriteguide/

=item * articles

Security and Apache: An Essential Primer
http://linuxplanet.com/linuxplanet/print/1527/

Using Apache with Suexec on Linux
http://linuxplanet.com/linuxplanet/print/1445/

Installing and Securing the Apache Webserver with SSL
http://www.securityfocus.com/focus/sun/articles/apache-inst.html?&_ref=1653102939


=item * mod_throttle_access

mod_throttle_access is available at http://www.fremen.org/apache/


=back










=head1 Get help with DBI

=over

=item * Perl DBI examples

http://www.saturn5.com/~jwb/dbi-examples.html (by Jeffrey William
Baker).

=item * DBI Homepage

http://www.symbolstone.org/technology/perl/DBI/

=item * DBI mailing list information

http://www.fugue.com/dbi/ 

=item * DBI mailing list archives

http://outside.organic.com/mail-archives/dbi-users/
http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/dbi/

=item * Persistent connections with mod_perl

http://perl.apache.org/src/mod_perl.html#PERSISTENT_DATABASE_CONNECTIONS

=back








=head1 Get help with Squid - Internet Object Cache

=over 4

=item *

Home page - http://squid.nlanr.net/

=item *

FAQ - http://squid.nlanr.net/Squid/FAQ/FAQ.html

=item *

Users Guide - http://squid.nlanr.net/Squid/Users-Guide/

=item *

Mailing lists - http://squid.nlanr.net/Squid/mailing-lists.html

=back





=head1 Get help with CVS -- Concurrent Version Control

=over


=item *

mod_perl repository specific doc: mod_perl_cvs.pod, located in the
root of the mod_perl source distribution and online at
http://perl.apache.org/mod_perl_cvs.html

=item *

Open Source Development with CVS
http://cvsbook.red-bean.com/

=item *

Online Documents
http://www.sourcegear.com/CVS/Docs/online

=item *

CVS Quick Reference
http://www.sourcegear.com/CVS/Docs/ref

=item *

CVS Books
http://www.sourcegear.com/CVS/Docs/books

=item *

User-Written FAQ
http://www.sourcegear.com/CVS/Docs/docfaq

=item *

Introduction to CVS
http://www.sourcegear.com/CVS/Docs/blandy


=back


=head1 Get help with Performance and Scalability

=over

=item * Techniques and Technologies for Scaling Internet Services mailing list.

The list's address: scalable@arctic.org.
Subscribe by sending a message to scalable-subscribe@arctic.org.


=item *

=back



=head1 Get help with Unix OS flavors -- Unix OS related resources

=over

=item * Memory system management and arhitecture:

The Solaris memory system, sizing, tools and architecture:
http://www.sun.com/solutions/third-party/global/SAS/pdf/vmsizing.pdf

=item * 


=back





=cut
